TrustedTypes injection - Document.write() and Document.writeln() (#37952)
mdn/content: files/en-us/web/api/document/write/index.md

> 

Author: This is a rewrite of the original doc to the new doc standard and the addition of live example for Trusted Types.

> > In other cases, the call can clear the current page first, as if {{domxref("document.open()")}} had been called.
> > In yet more cases, the method is simply ignored, or throws an exception. Users agents are [explicitly allowed to avoid executing `script` elements inserted via this method](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/parsing.html#document-written-scripts-intervention).
> > And to make matters even worse, the exact behavior of this method can in some cases be dependent on network latency, which can lead to failures that are very hard to debug.
> > For all these reasons, use of this method is strongly discouraged.

The **write()`** method of the {{domxref("Document")}} interface writes text in one or more {{domxref("TrustedHTML")}} or string parameters to a document stream opened by {{domxref("document.open()")}}.

## Syntax

```js-nolint
write(markup)
write(markup, markup2)
write(markup, markup2, /* …, */ markupN)
```

### Parameters

- `markup`, …, `markupN`
  - : {{domxref("TrustedHTML")}} or string objects containing the text to be written to the document.

>     `TrustedHTML` is recommended for sanitizing any markup that may have been provided as user input.

Reviewer: You could consider omitting this line, on the basis that Syntax should only be descriptive and not provide guidance.

Author: ```suggestion
```

### Return value

None ({{jsxref("undefined")}}).

### Exceptions

- `InvalidStateError` {{domxref("DOMException")}}
  - : The method was called on an XML document, or called when the parser is currently executing a custom element constructor.
- `TypeError`

>   - : A string is passed as one of the parameters when [Trusted Types](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Trusted_Types_API) are enforced (using [CSP: require-trusted-types-for](/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/Content-Security-Policy/require-trusted-types-for)), and no [default policy](/en-US/docs/Web/API/TrustedTypePolicyFactory/createPolicy#the_default_policy) has been defined for creating {{domxref("TrustedHTML")}} objects.

Author: Yes, both of those links are more immediately useful. Thanks.

```suggestion
  - : A string is passed as one of the parameters when [Trusted Types are enforced](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Trusted_Types_API#using_a_csp_to_enforce_trusted_types) and [no default policy has been defined](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/TrustedTypePolicyFactory/createPolicy#creating_a_default_policy) for creating {{domxref("TrustedHTML")}} objects.
```

## Description

`document.write()` parses the markup text in the objects passed as parameters into the open document's object model (DOM), in the order that the parameters are specified.

The passed objects may be strings or {{domxref("TrustedHTML")}} instances.

> Using the `TrustedHTML` [trusted type](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Trusted_Types_API) is recommended, as this allows the strings to be passed through a transformation function (and potentially sanitized) before they are parsed into the document.

Author: @wbamberg Thanks. Yes. I've added a slightly-more-linked modification of this boilerplate to both methods in https://github.com/mdn/content/pull/37952/commits/758dcbec3b2e51f49466b6fd741426eb6432bf84

It looks a bit odd in the `write()` method which already has two big warnings. Those same big warnings should also be on Writeln. I'm working on getting deprecated added at least via BCD. Anyway, I think the sea of red should stop anyone using these :-). 

1. Note, we may need to add slightly different boilerplate to some of the other methods, such as `Element.innerHTML`.
   This boilerplate would be strictly accurate, but would not reflect the benefit that you could get in this case of using `Element.setHTML()`, which would guarantee XSS safe HTML, or `Element.setHTML()` which can be used with trusted types, but allows you to further start from a safe sanitiser configuration.
2. We should probably explain what you should replace these methods with as well, but maybe not this round. I assume you'd just get the body element of the current window and call `setHTML()` to populate it with your own safe content.

#### HTML

```html
<p>Some original document content.</p>
<button id="replace" type="button">Replace document content</button>
```

#### JavaScript

First we use the {{domxref("Window.trustedTypes")}} property to access the global {{domxref("TrustedTypePolicyFactory")}}, and use its {{domxref("TrustedTypePolicyFactory/createPolicy","createPolicy()")}} method to define a policy called `"docPolicy"`.

The new policy defines a transformation function `createHTML()` for creating the {{domxref("TrustedHTML")}} objects that we will pass to the `write()` method.
This method can do anything it likes with the input string: the trusted types API just requires that you pass the input through a policy transformation function, not that the trusted type does anything in particular.

Commonly you'd use the method to sanitize the input of XSS-unsafe elements and attributes, perhaps using a third party library such as [DOMPurify](https://github.com/cure53/DOMPurify).

> In this case we implement rudimentary "sanitizer" that just replaces `<` symbols with the `&lt;` characters.

Author: @wbamberg In line with your other suggestion on formatting the examples I have 
- made them the same structure, except for using TT 
- The third string is a script
- W.r.t. this comment I have made this JUST affect script elements so we can show how HTML parsing can be conditionally tidied. It is still contrived, but it addresses your main concern of this bit .
- I made the TT example first - strings are now the second option.

document.close();
```

[The trusted types JavaScript API](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Trusted_Types_API#the_trusted_types_javascript_api) section of _Trusted Types API_ explains policy definition and enforcement in more detail.
We also provide an example below.

### Usage notes

Writing to a document that is already loaded without first calling {{domxref("document.open()")}} will automatically call `document.open()`.
This will replace the content of the loaded document.

The exception is that if the `document.write()` call is embedded within an inline HTML `<script>` tag, then it will not automatically call `document.open()`:

```html
<script>
  document.write("<h1>Main title</h1>");
</script>
```

`document.write()` and {{domxref("document.writeln")}} cannot be used with XML or XHTML, and attempting to do so will throw an `InvalidStateError` exception.

Using `document.write()` in [deferred](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/script#defer) or [asynchronous](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/script#async) scripts will be ignored and you'll get a message like "A call to `document.write()` from an asynchronously-loaded external script was ignored" in the error console.

> Starting with version 55, Chrome will not execute `<script>` elements injected via `document.write()` when specific conditions are met. For more information, refer to [Intervening against document.write()](https://developer.chrome.com/blog/removing-document-write/).

Author: This comes from old version. I have not verified it, but I expect it still to be true.

```html
<p>Some original document content.</p>
<button id="replace" type="button">Replace document content</button>
```

```js
const replace = document.querySelector("#replace");

replace.addEventListener("click", () => {
  document.open();
  document.write("<h1>Out with the old</h1>", "<p>in with the new!</p>");
  document.close();
});
```

{{EmbedLiveSample("Write strings")}}

### Writing TrustedHTML

This example is the same as the one before, except that the first parameter is sanitized.

```html
<p>Some original document content.</p>
<button id="replace" type="button">Replace document content</button>
```

```js
const replace = document.querySelector("#replace");

const writeDocumentHTMLPolicy = trustedTypes.createPolicy("myDocumentPolicy", {
  createHTML: (string) => string.replace(/</g, "&lt;"),
});

const escapedDocumentHTML = writeDocumentHTMLPolicy.createHTML(
  "<h1>Out with the old</h1>",
);

replace.addEventListener("click", () => {
  document.open();
  document.write(escapedDocumentHTML, "<p>in with the new!</p>");
  document.close();
});
```

Press the button and note that the "heading text" is rendered as plain text.

{{EmbedLiveSample("Writing TrustedHTML")}}

> We use the {{domxref("Window.trustedTypes")}} to access the global {{domxref("TrustedTypePolicyFactory")}}, and call its {{domxref("TrustedTypePolicyFactory/createPolicy","createPolicy()")}} method to define the sanitize function used for creating {{domxref("TrustedHTML")}} objects from text.

Author: Below here is stuff I am going to inject into the example.
